---
title: "Stickiness: A New Variable to Characterize the Temperature and Humidity Contributions toward Humid Heat"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/stickiness
date: 2024-05-01
venue: 'Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences'
paperurl: 'https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/atsc/81/5/JAS-D-23-0072.1.xml'
citation: 'Ivanovich, C. C., Sobel, A. H., Horton, R. M., & Raymond, C. (2024). Stickiness: A New Variable to Characterize the Temperature and Humidity Contributions toward Humid Heat. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, 81(5), 819–837. https://doi.org/10.1175/JAS-D-23-0072.1'
---

Abstract: Extreme wet-bulb temperatures (Tw) are often used as indicators of heat stress. However, humid heat extremes are fundamentally compound events, and a given Tw can be generated by various combinations of temperature and humidity. Differentiating between extreme humid heat driven by temperature versus humidity is essential to identifying these extremes’ physical drivers and preparing for their distinct impacts. Here we explore the variety of combinations of temperature and humidity contributing to humid heat experienced across the globe. In addition to using traditional metrics, we derive a novel thermodynamic state variable named “stickiness.” Analogous to the oceanographic variable “spice” (which quantifies the relative contributions of temperature and salinity to a given water density), stickiness quantifies the relative contributions of temperature and specific humidity to a given Tw. Consistent across metrics, we find that high magnitudes of Tw tend to occur in the presence of anomalously high moisture, with temperature anomalies of secondary importance. This widespread humidity dependence is consistent with the nonlinear relationship between temperature and specific humidity as prescribed by the Clausius–Clapeyron relationship. Nonetheless, there is a range of stickiness observed at moderate-to-high Tw thresholds. Stickiness allows a more objective evaluation of spatial and temporal variability in the temperature versus humidity dependence of humid heat than traditional variables. In regions with high temporal variability in stickiness, predictive skill for humid heat-related impacts may improve by considering fluctuations in atmospheric humidity in addition to dry-bulb temperature.

News coverage includes [The New York Times](https://messaging-custom-newsletters.nytimes.com/dynamic/render?free_trial=0&paid_regi=1&productCode=CLIM&isViewInBrowser=true&uri=nyt://newsletter/20d42261-f554-51dd-bf20-187f79c538d9), [Eos Magazine](https://eos.org/articles/how-sticky-is-it-outside), and [The Climate Divide](https://holacultura.com/podcasts/dcheatislands/).
